Encoding - NOT a form of encryption, just a form of data representation like base64. Immediately reversible.
Passphrase - Separate to the key, a passphrase is similar to a password and used to protect a key.
Standards like PCI-DSS state that the data should be encrypted both at rest (in storage) AND while being transmitted.

Types of encryption
1. Symmetric encryption - uses same key to encrypt and decrypt data. Ex: DES (Broken) and AES. Faster than asymmetric cryptography, and use smaller keys (128 or 256 bit keys are common for AES, DES keys are 56 bits long).
2. Asymmetric encryption - uses a pair of keys, public key and private key,one to encrypt and the other to decrypt. Ex: RSA and Elliptic Curve Cryptography. Slower and uses larger keys, for example RSA typically uses 2048 to 4096 bit keys.

RSA - Rivest Shamir Adleman
Tools for defeating RSA challenges in CTFs, https://github.com/Ganapati/RsaCtfTool and https://github.com/ius/rsatool.
The key variables for RSA in CTFs : p, q, m, n, e, d, and c.
“p” and “q” are large prime numbers, “n” is the product of p and q.
The public key is n and e, the private key is n and d.
“m” is used to represent the message (in plaintext) and “c” represents the ciphertext (encrypted text).
To learn the maths behind it,  https://muirlandoracle.co.uk/2020/01/29/rsa-encryption/.

Establishing Keys Using Asymmetric Cryptography
A symmetric encryption key is encrypted using the server’s public key and sent to the server which can be decrypted using the server’s private key only.
Asymmetric cryptography is used only once, so it’s fast, and you can now communicate privately with symmetric encryption.
In reality, to verify the person you’re talking to is who they say they are, is done using digital signatures and certificates.
https://robertheaton.com/2014/03/27/how-does-https-actually-work/

Digital signatures and Certificates
Digital signatures 
A way to prove the authenticity of files, to prove who created or modified them. Using asymmetric cryptography, you produce a signature with your private key and it can be verified using your public key.
Certificates 
Also a key use of public key cryptography, linked to digital signatures. A common place where they’re used is for HTTPS. 
The web server has a certificate that says it is the real tryhackme.com. The certificates have a chain of trust, starting with a root CA (certificate authority). Root CAs are automatically trusted by your device, OS, or browser from install. Certs below that are trusted because the Root CAs say they trust that organisation. Certificates below that are trusted because the organisation is trusted by the Root CA and so on. There are long chains of trust.
https://robertheaton.com/2014/03/27/how-does-https-actually-work/

SSH authentication
By default, SSH is authenticated using usernames and passwords
Machine can also have SSH configured with key authentication instead. This uses public and private keys. By default, SSH keys are RSA keys. You can choose which algorithm to generate, and/or add a passphrase to encrypt the SSH key. ssh-keygen is the program used to generate pairs of keys most of the time.
The ~/.ssh folder is the default place to store these keys for OpenSSH. The authorized_keys file in this directory holds public keys that are allowed to access the server if key authentication is enabled.
In order to use a private SSH key, the permissions must be set up correctly otherwise your SSH client will ignore the file with a warning. Only the owner should be able to read or write to the private key (600 or stricter). ssh -i keyNameGoesHere user@host is how you specify a key for the standard Linux OpenSSH client.
SSH keys are an excellent way to “upgrade” a reverse shell, assuming the user has login enabled (www-data normally does not, but regular users and root will). Leaving an SSH key in authorized_keys on a box can be a useful backdoor, and you don't need to deal with any of the issues of unstabilised reverse shells like Control-C or lack of tab completion.

Explaining Diffie Hellman Key Exchange
To establish a common key, can use symmetric cryptography, but if you don’t want to use key exchange with asymmetric cryptography, can use DH Key Exchange.
Alice and Bob both have secrets that they generate, let’s call these A and B. They also have some common material that’s public, let’s call this C.
We need to make some assumptions. Firstly, whenever we combine secrets/material it’s impossible or very very difficult to separate. Secondly, the order that they're combined in doesn’t matter.
Alice and Bob will combine their secrets with the common material, and form AC and BC. They will then send these to each other, and combine that with their secrets to form two identical keys, both ABC. Now they can use this key to communicate.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NmM9HA2MQGI
DH Key Exchange is often used alongside RSA public key cryptography, to prove the identity of the person you’re talking to with digital signing. This prevents someone from attacking the connection with a man-in-the-middle attack by pretending to be Bob.

PGP, GPG and AES
PGP - PGP stands for Pretty Good Privacy. It’s a software that implements encryption for encrypting files, performing digital signing and more.
GPG - GnuPG or GPG is an Open Source implementation of PGP from the GNU project. You may need to use GPG to decrypt files in CTFs. With PGP/GPG, private keys can be protected with passphrases in a similar way to SSH private keys. You can attempt to crack this passphrase using John The Ripper and gpg2john.
AES - sometimes called Rijndael after its creators, stands for Advanced Encryption Standard. It was a replacement for DES which had short keys and other cryptographic flaws. AES and DES both operate on blocks of data (a block is a fixed size series of bits).
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O4xNJsjtN6E

The Future - Quantum Computers and Encryption
Quantum computers can very efficiently solve the mathematical problems that these algorithms rely on for their strength.
Encryption that uses RSA or Elliptical Curve Cryptography will be very fast to break. 
AES with 128 bit keys is also likely to be broken by quantum computers in the near future, but 256 bit AES can’t be broken as easily. Triple DES is also vulnerable to attacks from quantum computers.
The NSA recommends using RSA-3072 or better for asymmetric encryption and AES-256 or better for symmetric encryption. 
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8105
