OWASP TOP 10

SQL injection and command injection
input is passed to SQL queries or system commands
can be prevented using allow list(compared to a list to see if safe or not) and stripping input (dangerous charecters removed)

passthru() in php 
it executes what gets entered into the input then passing the output directly back to the browser.


cut -d : -f 1 /etc/passwd
to get the users from the /etc/passwd file

w    (or)  who
to list currently logged in users

users
to display the users

lastlog
recent login info

lsb_release -a
to check ubuntu version

MOTD - message of the day (used to send a common message to all the users) (welcome message)
/etc/motd is not a script but a text file. contents are shown before the first prompt of a login session.
locate motd
cat  /etc/update-motd.d/00-header

Create a file in /etc/profile.d called greeting.sh
If you don't want to do this for every user, add it to ~/.profile or ~/.bash_profile


Broken authentication
A user would enter login credentials, the server would verify them. If they are correct, the server would then provide the users’ browser with a session cookie. 
A session cookie is needed because web servers use HTTP(S) to communicate which is stateless. Attaching session cookies means that the server will know who is sending what data. The server can then keep track of users' actions. 

re-registration of an existing user.
say there is an existing user with the name admin and now we want to get access to their account so what we can do is try to re-register that username but with slight modification. We are going to enter " admin"(notice the space in the starting). Now when you enter that in the username field and enter other required information like email id or password and submit that data. It will actually register a new user but that user will have the same right as normal admin. That new user will also be able to see all the content presented under the user admin.


Sensitive Data Exposure
Databases can also be stored as files. These databases are referred to as "flat-file" databases, as they are stored as a single file on the computer.
The most common (and simplest) format of flat-file database is an sqlite database. Can be interacted with sqlite3 client.

file example.db      (shows details about the file)
sqlite3 example.db
sqlite> .tables          (to see the tables in the DB)
sqlite> PRAGMA table_info(customers);             (to see the table information)
sqlite> SELECT * FROM customers;

Password hash cracking
online tool: Crackstation     (to crack weak password hashes like MD5)
Crackstation works using a massive wordlist. If the password is not in the wordlist then Crackstation will not be able to break the hash.


Challenge:
given a webapp's address. developer has left a note indicating that there is sensitive data in a specific directory. Hint: view source code of login page
Found that '/assets' was the directory.
went to 'website_link/assets'
found webapp.db, downloaded it and opened it using sqlite3 after seeing the file type.
sqlite> .tables          (to see the tables in the DB)
sqlite> PRAGMA table_info(useres);             (to see the table information)
sqlite> SELECT * FROM users;
found admin's hashed password. cracked it using crackstation. logged in as admin and found the flag
